---
title: 2024秋冬开源操作系统训练营第二阶段总结-杨学聪
date: 2024-11-10 09:57:29
categories:
    - summary
tags:
    - author:dosconio
---

After the second stage of the 2024 autumn winter open source operating system training camp, I would like to share my experience and summary with you.

This is the twice time I participated in the training camp, and this time I mainly learned about the basic knowledge of operating systems, including the process of operating system development, the structure of operating systems, and the basic principles of operating systems. 

In the past years, I have spent a lot in operating system for x86 boards, including assembly, multi-language, segmentation, paging and multitask, which covers the real mode and protected mode.

It was the training camp that made me touch the RISC-V64 architecture.

I love RustSBI, but it made me kind of confused. I cannot make sense of the base implementation of the system, although it may be all right to depend on it.

With RustSBI, I easily realised the TIMER interrupt. This makes OSDev much easy! In x86 board, we need to write the control words to the PIC/RTC peripheral.

We used Trampoline to implement the syscall, exception, interrupt and other traps. This is very smart and comfortable. And this is the only assemly code in the whole project.

I also had the problem to treat the paired-notions like: "task" and "thread", "process" and "task".

In general, I have had a better understanding of operating systems development, RISC-V64 architecture, Rust and QEmu Simulator.

In the future, I'd like to rewrite my [MECOCOA](https://mecocoa.org) project, which make architecture "x86" and "Risc-V64" harmonious.

Thank you. Thanks to teachers and the people who have helped me.

*Dosconio*.

2024AD Nov 10, Sun.
